JUDY WOODRUFF: Good evening.
I'm Judy Woodruff.
On the "NewsHour" tonight: Bill
O'Reilly forced
out of FOX News, following a
stream of sexual
harassment complaints and
disclosures of quiet
payoffs.
Also ahead: close call in
Georgia -- examining
the results from the special
congressional
election.
Then: playground fight at the
Supreme Court.
Should state dollars fund
repairs at a church-owned
day care?
And inside America's militia
movement -- why
armed right-wing groups are
active across
the nation.
MAN: It could be our own
government overreaching.
If we end up with a tyrant in
office, no one
knows what could happen in 15
years, but at
least we're going to be
prepared.
JUDY WOODRUFF: All that and more
on tonight's
"PBS NewsHour."
(BREAK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: The battle for a
U.S. House
seat near Atlanta has come down
to a run-off,
in a race seen as a referendum
on President
Trump.
A Democrat easily led Tuesday's
voting, but
faces a run-off with a
Republican, in a district
that has voted Republican for
years.
We will have a full report later
in the program.
In Britain, the House of Commons
overwhelmingly
approved Prime Minister Theresa
May's call
for an early national election.
She proposed holding the vote in
June, instead
of waiting until 2020, while
Britain is also
negotiating its exit from the
European Union.
Before today's vote, may urged
lawmakers to
give the government the
strongest possible
hand in the Brexit talks.
THERESA MAY, British Prime
Minister: Leaving
the election to 2020 would mean
that we would
be coming to the most sensitive
and critical
part of the negotiations in the
run-up to
a general election, and that
would be in nobody's
interest.
JUDY WOODRUFF: May ruled out
holding televised
debates during the brief
election campaign.
Turkey's national electoral
board today refused
to annul Sunday's referendum
that greatly
expanded the president's powers.
The main opposition party
brought the challenge,
and its deputy chairman insisted
the appeals
process is a long way from over.
BULENT TEZCAN, Turkish
Politician (through
translator): The internal legal
process is
now closed with the high
electoral board decision,
but we are determined to employ
all legal
ways.
We are responsible for both
ourselves and
for the 49 percent of the
Turkish people who
voted for no.
We will fulfill our
responsibility.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The opposition
says it will
go to Turkey's constitutional
court, and,
if need be, to the European
Court of Human
Rights.
In Syria, evacuations of
thousands of people
resumed today from four besieged
villages.
It was part of an exchange deal
involving
two rebel-held towns near
Damascus and two
pro-government villages in the
north.
Civilians and fighters were
transported by
bus.
The exchange was delayed after a
suicide bomber
attacked a convoy on Saturday,
killing more
than 120 evacuees.
Vice President Pence used an
aircraft carrier
as the backdrop today to warn
North Korea
yet again.
He addressed some 2,500 sailors
aboard the
U.S. Ronald Reagan in Tokyo Bay,
and he promised
an overwhelming response if
North Korea tries
something.
MIKE PENCE, Vice President of
the United States:
The United States of America
will always seek
peace, but under President
Trump, the shield
stands guard and the sword
stands ready.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The White House
faced questions
today about announcements last
week that another
carrier was sailing for the
Koreas, at a time
when it was still headed the
opposite way.
Press Secretary Sean Spicer
defended the president's
statements, and his own.
SEAN SPICER, White House Press
Secretary:
What I was asked was, what
signal did it send
that it was going there?
And I answered that question
correctly at
the time, that it signaled
foreign presence,
strength, and a reassurance to
our allies.
That's a true statement.
JUDY WOODRUFF: As of today, the
USS Carl Vinson
carrier group and its entire
strike group
were still en route to waters
off the Korean
Peninsula.
Two more Russian long-range
bombers have been
spotted off Alaska.
It was widely reported today
that the aircraft
were detected last night, about
40 miles from
the Alaskan coast.
A similar flyby happened Monday.
Political discord was in the air
today as
President Trump hosted the Super
Bowl champions
New England Patriots.
Several players cited opposition
to him or
his policies as a reason for
staying away.
Star quarterback Tom Brady said
that he was
dealing with a personal family
matter.
The ceremony was overshadowed by
news that
former Patriots star Aaron
Hernandez hanged
himself overnight in his prison
cell.
He was serving a life sentence
without parole
for murder.
Newly filed reports show that
the Trump inaugural
committee raised a
record-shattering $107
million.
That nearly doubles the record
that was set
by President Obama, eight years
ago.
The biggest contributors
included casino mogul
Sheldon Adelson, plus Bank of
America, Boeing
and others.
Mr. Trump's nominee to be deputy
secretary
of commerce has withdrawn.
Todd Ricketts, the co-owner of
the Chicago
Cubs, said that he is not able
to resolve
conflicts of interest.
And on Wall Street, the Dow
Jones industrial
average lost 118 points, thanks
partly to
a drop in oil prices.
It closed at 20404.
The Nasdaq rose 13, and the S&P
500 slipped
four.
Still to come on the "NewsHour":
the O'Reilly
factor, Bill O'Reilly out at FOX
News; close
call in Georgia, what does it
mean?; playground
fight -- should state
governments fund repairs
at church schools?; and much
more.
Bill O'Reilly is out at FOX
News.
In a statement today, the
company said: "After
a thorough and careful review of
allegations
against him, the company and
Bill O'Reilly
have agreed that Mr. O'Reilly
will not return
to FOX News Channel."
The popular TV host and
commentator has been
the face of the network for
nearly two decades.
That all began to unravel after
a New York
Times revealed that FOX paid
some $13 million
to settle allegations of sexual
harassment
filed by women O'Reilly worked
with.
Mr. O'Reilly has long denied
those allegations.
And in a statement late today,
he said: "It
is tremendously disheartening
that we part
ways due to completely unfounded
claims.
But that is the unfortunate
reality many of
us in the public eye must live
with today."
With these latest developments,
and what this
ouster may mean for a safer
workplace, I spoke
a few moments ago to Michael
Schmidt, a reporter
with The New York Times team who
help break
the most recent story, and
Noreen Farrell.
She's executive director of the
civil rights
organization Equal Rights
Advocates.
I started by asking Schmidt what
changed the
minds of the Murdoch family.
They're the owners of FOX News.
MICHAEL SCHMIDT, The New York
Times: Well,
we wrote our story
two-and-a-half weeks ago,
where we said that Mr. O'Reilly
had settled
harassment cases with five
women, including
two in the past year, since
Roger Ailes had
left the network.
And at the time of our story,
the Murdoch
family was really standing by
Mr. O'Reilly.
They looked like they wanted to
keep him on.
But what happened was that he
began to lose
advertisers.
First, he lost Mercedes-Benz,
the first one
to go, and then dozens and
dozens of companies,
went up to about 50.
And what you had was an 8:00
hour, the prime
time on the network, that had
just a few ads
running on it.
And at the same time, FOX had
brought in an
outside law firm to do an
investigation into
Mr. O'Reilly, and there was a
real trickle
of women that came in that were
saying different
things about Mr. O'Reilly that
the network
didn't know about.
So they sort of saw these two
things emerging,
and the dynamics in the Murdoch
family changed,
and that's where we got to
today, where they
basically dismissed him.
JUDY WOODRUFF: But it wasn't
just about money,
or was it?
MICHAEL SCHMIDT: Well, the
Murdoch family
hasn't really spoken about this.
But what we do know is that the
younger -- Rupert's
younger sons, youngest son,
really care about
the culture of the network and
sort of modernizing
it.
And what happened was is that
after Roger
Ailes left last summer, they
that said they
were going to change the culture
and that
it was going to be different at
FOX and that
women were going to feel
comfortable there
and there weren't going to be
issues.
But what happened was is that,
over that period
of time, they learned about a
deal Mr. O'Reilly
had cut with a woman in 2011.
They allowed Mr. O'Reilly to cut
two more
deals.
Then this was exposed, and it
put pressure
on them.
There were protests outside of
the network.
There was a plane that flew a
banner around
New York City calling for Mr.
O'Reilly's ouster,
and there was real public
pressure on them.
And I think the sons really won
out here.
Rupert has extreme loyalty to
Mr. O'Reilly,
who was one of the founding
hosts will of
the network when it started 20
years ago.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Michael Schmidt,
as somebody
who has covered network news,
covered related
stories, is this an earthquake
in television
news?
MICHAEL SCHMIDT: Well, I think
Mr. O'Reilly's
probably the most recognized
host in cable
television.
He certainly had the highest
ratings.
He certainly had, if not the, or
close to
the highest revenues.
And he was a real voice for
conservatives
in this country.
He sort of spoke to old-school
American values
and really preached them.
And that preachiness and his
tone, you know,
rubbed some people the wrong
way, but it also
brought in some really, really
high ratings.
And he really established
himself and had
a real voice, more so than
anything.
And particularly to FOX, he was
seen as very
important because, at the 8:00
hour, he would
bring in a lot of ratings, and
then 9:00 and
10:00 would have big ratings as
well.
So, the question FOX, I think,
they were afraid
of is, well, if we take O'Reilly
out of 8:00,
is the ratings not just going to
go down for
8:00, but 9:00 and 10:00?
And that's what the world that
they're walking
into now.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Noreen Farrell,
we're hearing
Michael described old-fashioned
family values
that Bill O'Reilly stood for.
But his leaving is about
something very different,
isn't it?
NOREEN FARRELL, Executive
Director, Equal
Rights Advocates: Yes, and I
think this is
actually a pretty remarkable
moment in the
cultural Zeitgeist of sexual
harassment, because
we're seeing the power of men
and women as
consumers to influence
workplaces that are
not their own.
And I think, you know, to all
the companies
that pulled out of Bill
O'Reilly's show, I
think many women in America
thank them.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Do you think,
Noreen Farrell,
this is going to have an effect
on the workplace
broadly, or are we -- I mean,
there were those
who predicted that back when
Roger Ailes left
FOX.
NOREEN FARRELL: Well, I think,
more and more,
we're seeing that there are
different strategies
that influence workplaces that
create incentives
that clearly 50 years of federal
and state
laws prohibiting sexual
harassment have not.
And that includes people who
organize online,
who are really public about
protests, who
influence companies that are
affiliated with
companies where there are bad
practices, because,
look, this happened in two
weeks.
This probably would take a
lawsuit 10 years.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Michael Schmidt,
is there a
sense -- I know you have been
talking to a
lot of employees at FOX -- that
there is no
more tolerance for sexual
harassment at FOX
anymore?
MICHAEL SCHMIDT: Well, I'm not
sure that the
employees are convinced of that,
because the
Murdochs said last summer that
there wouldn't
be any more tolerance for this,
and that they
had done away with this.
They had brought in a firm to
investigate
Mr. Ailes, and they said they
had turned the
page and that things were going
to change.
But then the employees look, and
they look
the how the network stood by Mr.
O'Reilly,
knowing all the things they that
did when
our story ran and continued to
support him
in the days after that.
And we're two, two-and-a-half
weeks out from
the story now.
So, the question for employees
is, how is
FOX going to prove itself to
them that they
are, indeed, serious about this
issue?
I guess getting rid of Mr.
O'Reilly sends
a certain message, but going
forward, what
will be different?
And I think that's what they
really wonder.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Noreen Farrell,
when you and
Michael were on the program a
couple of weeks
ago, when this story first
broke, I think
I asked you a version of this
same question,
but that is, are women in other
workplaces
who have reason to feel
threatened, who are
experiencing sexual harassment,
do they take
away -- are they empowered as a
result of
this?
Can they take away any advice
for how to handle
their own situations?
NOREEN FARRELL: I certainly
think this is
a good day for women who want to
stand up
for their rights in the
workplace.
I do think it remains to be
seen, whether
or not Mr. O'Reilly is given a
golden parachute
or just his walking papers,
about how committed
this company is to really
eradicating sexual
harassment in its workplaces.
But, certainly, I think that
this is a day
that women who -- and men who
believe sexual
harassment has no place in the
workplace can
feel good.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And, Michael
Schmidt, do you
expect -- I mean, is your
reporting telling
you that there will be a large
severance for
Bill O'Reilly, as there was for
Roger Ailes?
I guess he got, what, $20
million?
MICHAEL SCHMIDT: Well, what's
interesting
here is that FOX renegotiated
Mr. O'Reilly's
contract while they knew our
investigation
was going on, and while they
knew that these
settlements had occurred.
It's believed that, in that
contract, FOX
was able to get some sort of
leverage over
Mr. O'Reilly that, if something
went wrong,
they had a better way of getting
out of it.
So ,does that mean that FOX can
get out of
the contract without having to
give him a
lot of money?
We don't know those details yet.
But we do know that Mr. O'Reilly
was making
at least $20 million a year, and
has brought
in millions of dollars in books
for himself
and in different paraphernalia
that he sells
on his show.
And, you know, so the question
is, what kind
of hit is Mr. O'Reilly taking
and what will
he be doing going forward?
JUDY WOODRUFF: Thank you,
Michael Schmidt
and Noreen Farrell.
We appreciate it.
NOREEN FARRELL: Thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Democrats came
close, but Republicans
managed to avoid a potentially
brutal loss
in Georgia, for now, forcing a
run-off in
a closely watched special
congressional election.
JON OSSOFF (D), Georgia
Congressional Candidate:
This is already a victory for
the ages.
(CHEERING AND APPLAUSE)
JUDY WOODRUFF: Thirty-year-old
Democrat Jon
Ossoff fell just short of an
outright win
in Tuesday's crowded special
election.
But by capturing 48 percent of
the vote, the
filmmaker and former
congressional aide easily
outpaced the other 17
candidates.
JON OSSOFF: We have shattered
expectations.
(CHEERING AND APPLAUSE)
JON OSSOFF: We will be ready to
fight on and
win in June.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The seat in
Atlanta's suburbs
came open when Tom Price was
tapped by President
Trump to his Cabinet.
No Democrat has won here since
1979.
And now Ossoff faces a run-off
against Karen
Handel, a former Georgia
secretary of state,
and the top Republican, with 20
percent of
the vote.
KAREN HANDEL (R), Georgia
Congressional Candidate:
On June 20, we keep the Sixth
District red
and kick a little Ossoff.
(CHEERING AND APPLAUSE)
JUDY WOODRUFF: Handel never
mentioned President
Trump last night, but today said
she wants
his help.
QUESTION: Do you think that
President Trump
will come to Georgia and
campaign with you?
KAREN HANDEL: I would hope so.
It is all hands on deck for us.
JUDY WOODRUFF: For his part, the
president
compared the result with last
week's close
Republican win in Kansas.
He tweeted: "Dems failed in
Kansas and are
now failing in Georgia.
Great job, Karen Handel."
But Democratic Party's national
chair, Tom
Perez, praised the Ossoff
showing.
TOM PEREZ, Democratic National
Committee Chairman:
Just a few weeks ago, they were
saying a Democrat
can't get over 42 percent, 43
percent of the
vote.
He got 48.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The Georgia race
generated
national interest and a flood of
money.
Ossoff raised $8.2 million, 18
times more
than Handel.
In total, Republicans and
Democrats spent
more than $13 million.
And outside groups funneled in
nearly $8 million,
with more than half of that on
ads attacking
Ossoff.
The Republicans face at least
two more special
elections in the months ahead,
in Montana
and South Carolina.
So, can Democrats turn
anti-Trump sentiment
into actual wins in upcoming
races?
For that, we are joined by Stu
Rothenberg,
senior editor of Inside
Elections.
And Dante Chinni, he's director
of the American
Communities Project.
It's a county-by-county look at
the U.S. electorate.
He is also a columnist for The
Wall Street
Journal.
And we welcome both of you back
to the program.
Stu, more than $8 million,
unheard of amount
of money in this district.
Why couldn't the Democrat, Jon
Ossoff, pull
this off, get over 50 percent?
STUART ROTHENBERG, Inside
Elections: Well,
Judy, this is a very Republican
district.
You have to understand that --
by more than
a dozen points.
Republicans, when you look at
past Republican
performance, Mitt Romney winning
it overwhelmingly.
Tom Price won it very
comfortably, over 60
percent of the vote.
So, it's a tough lift for any
Democrat.
And I think Ossoff did exceed
expectations.
And now we will see what happens
with the
run-off.
Again, it's always about
turnout, isn't it?
JUDY WOODRUFF: For sure.
Dante, what did Democrats do
right?
What did Ossoff do right, and
where could
he, should he have done better?
DANTE CHINNI, American
Communities Project:
I think what they did right is,
they found
a good district to run in,
frankly.
This is a district that --
Donald Trump only
won this district by 1.5 points,
even though
Price won it by quite a bit.
And it's the kind of district
that is really
made for what the Democrats are
now.
It's extremely well-educated.
It is diverse.
It's not super diverse.
It looks a little bit like the
country at
large in terms of the white
non-Hispanic population.
This is a district that is made
for where
the party is right now.
And this is the -- these are the
kind of people,
the kinds of voters that the
party is resonating
with.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Stu, that doesn't
sound like
every single district out there
that Democrats
need to win.
STUART ROTHENBERG: No.
Well, look, Judy, this is a
Republican district,
but not a Trump district, and
there are other
districts out there.
There are 20 -- I think it's 23
Republicans
sitting in the House -- in House
districts
that were won by Hillary
Clinton.
The Democrats need 24 seats.
So, this is the kind of district
that's part
of the mix, highly educated,
high-income district
that doesn't take to Donald
Trump's style,
his personality, and some of his
issue agenda.
But there are other issues,
other districts
out there that Democrats are
going to have
to win, and win first, frankly,
before a district
like this.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, let's talk
for a moment
about Donald Trump, Dante
Chinni.
Is there a clear sense at this
point how much
difference he made or didn't
make in the outcome
here?
DANTE CHINNI: I think it's way
too early to
know what kind of difference he
made in terms
of helping keep Ossoff under 50
percent.
I think, though, that if you
look at what
happened in this district, look,
as Stu was
saying, this is a district where
Romney ran
up -- I think he won by 23
points.
In 2008, John McCain won this by
close to
20 points, I think 18 or 19
points.
JUDY WOODRUFF: These are
mainstream Republicans.
DANTE CHINNI: Yes.
So, this is a district where I
think, if you
were just looking at the
numbers, you would
say Donald Trump probably didn't
help -- helped
the Democrat much more than he
helped Karen
Handel.
And so the question -- when I
saw the question
asked of her, do you want Donald
Trump to
come down here, look, you're
going to say
what you're going to say.
He's president of the United
States.
You're a Republican seeking a
seat in Congress.
You're never going to say, don't
come down
here.
But when I look at that, just...
JUDY WOODRUFF: She said, I hope
so.
DANTE CHINNI: Yes.
Yes.
When I look at that district, I
don't -- who
knows?
Who knows?
I don't see the benefit in
Donald Trump going
down there for the Republican.
I see -- that's the kind of
thing, actually,
that could help Jon Ossoff.
Look, there are splits in the
Republican Party,
as Stu was saying.
There are different kinds of
districts.
This kind of district is not a
good district
for Trump.
OK?
This is the kind of district
where too much
Trump is going to maybe turn off
a lot of
the voters in this place.
Remember, we're not just talking
about Republicans.
There are moderates.
And moderates, this is not...
STUART ROTHENBERG: In fact, the
Democratic
strategy is to make the race a
referendum
on Donald Trump, because,
otherwise, it becomes
about party, partisanship, which
is bad for
Ossoff.
DANTE CHINNI: Yes.
STUART ROTHENBERG: So he needs
to make this
-- look, he's a young kid with
not a lot of
experience, not a lot of
credentials.
He doesn't even want the race to
be about
himself.
He wants it to be about the
president.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And I think both
of you were
saying this is going to be tough
for Ossoff
to win the run-off.
STUART ROTHENBERG: Well, because
it's such
a Republican district.
But if you add up the Republican
votes and
Democratic votes, it's likely to
be close.
I regard the district, the race
as a tossup.
DANTE CHINNI: Yes, I think Stu
is probably
right.
I think the political
environment is so unsettled
right now.
And normally, you would say,
June, that's
not that far away.
June in this 2017 feels about a
million years
from right now.
Who knows what Donald Trump is
going to tweet.
Ossoff is not -- he's a young
candidate, inexperienced
candidate.
A lot of things could happen.
But, yes, I agree.
Looking at it right now, it
looks like as
tossup.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, having said
all this, Stu,
what lessons can Democrats take
away from
this for these other places, not
just the
special elections this year, but
for next
year?
STUART ROTHENBERG: Well, I think
they're going
to have to nationalize and any
and all elections
and make it about a midterm
president who
is not particularly popular.
Trump's job approval, it depends
on what poll
you look, 39 percent, 40,
percent, 42 percent,
whatever it is.
So, they want these elections to
be about
Donald Trump and the more
controversial elements.
They are going to need to
recruit good candidates
in a large number of
congressional districts
to put those districts in play.
If they can do that, then it
depends.
We don't know what Trump's job
approval is
going to be like a
year-and-a-half from now.
We don't know what issues we're
going to be
talking about.
So, the dynamic needs to kind of
feed a sense
of change and a referendum on
trust for the
Democrats to win back the House.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And redistricting
in the geography,
the demography of these
districts isn't favorable
to Democrats, right?
DANTE CHINNI: No, but it's
changing.
Right?
This is because there are the
demographics
of the two parties as we
understand them now,
and the demographics of the two
parties as
they existed back in 2012.
Look, I think that Donald Trump
is taking
-- and I think a lot of people
is think this
-- is trying to take the party
in a different
direction, the GOP in a
different direction.
He wants to talk about populism.
He wants to talk to the people
that are left
behind.
Georgia 6 is not full of people
who are left
behind.
There's 58 percent of the
population here
who has a bachelor's degree.
The 10 best-educated districts
in the country,
nine of them are Democratic with
Democratic
members in Congress.
The 10th is Georgia 6.
It is an outlier in some ways.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, Stu, for
those districts
where Democrats believe they
have some kind
of decent shot next year...
STUART ROTHENBERG: I think there
will be enough
districts in play so that the
House is in
play.
It is not there now.
Democrats are just starting
recruiting.
They're going to have to have a
good fund-raising
cycle.
They're going to need a good
environment.
They're going to need the
president's job
approval to be down around 40
percent.
And if that happens, then they
will be able
to run -- make the midterm a
referendum on
him.
And the Republicans will try to
run a different
race.
They will try to localize it.
They will try to discredit the
Democratic
candidates.
JUDY WOODRUFF: A lot of ifs.
DANTE CHINNI: Yes.
And there are a lot of these
inherent splits
in the party.
Look, is Donald Trump the guy
who is going
to take the party and say, I'm
anti-trade,
I'm not pro-trade, I don't like
the global
economy?
There are a lot of Republicans
who do quite
well in the global economy,
thank you very
much.
And this is a very complicated
kind of issue
environment that has to play
out.
Where does he take the party?
And when he takes the party in
that direction,
what happens to these different
sides of the
party?
We don't know that.
We will find out a lot more six
months, 10
months from now.
JUDY WOODRUFF: April 19, we
don't expect perfect
future prediction from both of
you, but you
generally get it very right,
very close to
right.
Dante Chinni, Stu Rothenberg,
thanks very
much.
STUART ROTHENBERG: Thanks, Judy.
DANTE CHINNI: Thanks a lot.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Stay with us.
Coming up on the "NewsHour": a
failing state,
Venezuelans' protests spill out
onto the streets;
and in the U.S., scientists take
to the streets
protesting cuts in federal
science funding;
and inside America's militias.
But first: Back here in
Washington, the U.S.
Supreme Court grappled once
again with the
relationship between church and
state.
At the center of today's legal
fight, a school
playground.
Jeffrey Brown has more.
JEFFREY BROWN: Can the state of
Missouri give
money to repair the playground
of a church-run
day care?
And what have we learned in the
first days
of Justice Neil Gorsuch on the
bench?
Marcia Coyle, chief Washington
correspondent
for "The National Law Journal,"
was in the
courtroom today.
Hello again, Marcia.
MARCIA COYLE, "The National Law
Journal":
Hi, Jeff.
JEFFREY BROWN: Let's get right
to it.
The case is Trinity Lutheran vs.
Comer.
And it starts with a fairly
ordinary setting,
a playground.
MARCIA COYLE: A playground.
Trinity Lutheran Church in
Missouri operates
a day care center, and that day
care center
has a playground.
It applied for a state grant in
a program
that funds the refurbishing of
playgrounds
by the use of recycled tires.
Now, it complied with all...
JEFFREY BROWN: A good project,
right, to help
all kinds of...
MARCIA COYLE: It would seem so.
It fulfilled all the
requirements for the
grant, but it was denied a
grant.
And the explanation was that the
state constitution
prohibits the use of public
funds to either
directly or indirectly support
religious institutions.
JEFFREY BROWN: I'm going to read
the exact
language from the Missouri state
Constitution.
"No money shall ever be taken
from the public
treasury, directly or
indirectly, in aid of
any church, sect, or
denomination of religion."
MARCIA COYLE: Now, the church
decided to challenge
this denial, and it went to
court claiming
that the denial of its
application was a violation
of the First Amendment's Free
Exercise Clause,
and also the Equal Protection
Clause.
JEFFREY BROWN: OK, so we heard
the arguments
today.
MARCIA COYLE: We did.
And just -- the church did lose
in the lower
courts, which is why the church
brought it
to the U.S. Supreme Court.
Now, remember, the Free Exercise
Clause doesn't
require government to subsidize
religion.
In fact, it requires government
not to interfere
with religion.
And during the arguments today,
my general
sense was that there was more
sympathy than
not for the church.
I think probably the most
skeptical justice
of the church's position was
Justice Sotomayor.
She said there's a lot history
in the states,
of state laws not providing
direct support
to churches.
The church won't close its doors
here if it
doesn't refurbish its
playground.
There's no effect on religious
beliefs.
JEFFREY BROWN: Even if it's a
secular purpose
in this case, she still thinks
there's a case
to be made for not giving it to
the church.
MARCIA COYLE: That's right.
The church's lawyer said that
there is actually
coercion here, that the church
is being penalized
because of its status as a
religious organization.
We also heard on the other side
Justices Alito
and Breyer, for example, gave a
whole series
of hypotheticals to the state's
attorney,
saying, can the constitution
require a state
to deny police services or fire
services to
religious institutions?
And the state's lawyer said,
well, no.
And Justice Breyer said, well,
what's the
difference here with the
playground where
you're trying to keep little
children from
falling and breaking their
ankles?
JEFFREY BROWN: Even some of the
more liberal
justices were arguing -- or
seemed to be argue
in favor of the church.
MARCIA COYLE: In favor, yes,
exactly.
And the state's argument comes
back to this:
Look, we don't want to get
entangled with
churches.
This is a neutral program.
We don't want to be selecting
among churches.
And we don't want to be sending
a check directly
to a church for a physical
improvement.
JEFFREY BROWN: Now, the reason
people watch
these things is not only because
of a playground,
but larger implications.
MARCIA COYLE: Absolutely.
JEFFREY BROWN: In this case
particularly because
there are bigger societal
questions for about,
for example, school voucher
programs.
MARCIA COYLE: Yes.
In fact, a lot of the religious
organizations
that are supporting the church
in this case
really believe that this could
say a lot about
states that do now have
obstacles to school
vouchers.
And it also may have an impact
on a whole
range of state-funded programs
that do not
accept applications or support
religious organizations.
JEFFREY BROWN: OK.
In our last minute, the first
week of Justice
Neil Gorsuch, you got to watch
him.
I happened to be there myself on
Monday.
MARCIA COYLE: I know you were.
JEFFREY BROWN: What did you see?
MARCIA COYLE: Well, he's very
well-prepared.
He was very active on a hot
bench, although
I think by late today he was
getting a little
tired.
He wasn't asking as many
questions as he did
that first day.
He injects a certain amount of
humor, and
he seems to have a testy side to
him.
JEFFREY BROWN: A little bite.
MARCIA COYLE: Every now and
then, yes.
JEFFREY BROWN: Yes.
When he wants to, he can go back
and forth
quite sharply.
MARCIA COYLE: Yes, he can.
JEFFREY BROWN: Yes.
All right, we will be watching
the future
of Justice Neil Gorsuch and all
things with
you.
Marcia Coyle, thanks as always.
MARCIA COYLE: Thank you, Jeff.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Thousands of
Venezuelans took
to the streets in protest again
today.
Two demonstrators were killed,
as a political
crisis in this failing state
deepens.
Our chief foreign affairs
correspondent, Margaret
Warner, reports.
MARGARET WARNER: Organizers
dubbed it the
Mother of All Marches.
Hundreds of thousands of
opponents to socialist
President Nicolas Maduro flooded
Caracas.
RICHARD BLANCO, Venezuela
(through translator):
Today, people are in the street
demonstrating
peacefully, seeking a democratic
exit to a
situation that is already
overflowing.
Here, the president of the
republic is playing
with fire.
MARGARET WARNER: The peace was
broken almost
immediately, as protesters
clashed with police
and government supporters.
National Guard troops fired tear
gas, and
a teenage boy died after being
shot in the
head.
Demonstrators have tried
repeatedly in recent
days to reach the capital city's
downtown.
Each time, they were turned back
by riot police.
At least five people were
killed, and hundreds
arrested.
Brian Ellsworth of Reuters,
speaking to us
by Skype from Caracas, said
tensions have
been building.
BRIAN ELLSWORTH, Reuters: This
has been sort
of the culmination of that,
about two-and-a-half
weeks of all these
demonstrations.
The opposition called this big
demonstration
and said, all over the country,
we need to
be protesting against the
government.
MARGARET WARNER: These latest
protests erupted
last month, after the
pro-government Supreme
Court took over the powers of
the national
legislature controlled by the
opposition.
After an international outcry,
the court reversed
itself.
But the criticism continued.
MAN (through translator): They
haven't done
anything.
The Supreme Court has installed
a coup d'etat
it cannot correct.
MARGARET WARNER: The oil-rich
nation is also
mired in an economic crisis,
with skyrocketing,
triple-digit inflation, rampant
crime and
food shortages.
The opposition wants Maduro's
removed, new
elections and the release of
political prisoners,
including opposition leader
Leopoldo Lopez,
who was jailed in early 2014.
In February, Lopez's wife went
to the White
House with Florida Senator Marco
Rubio.
President Trump tweeted a photo
with her,
saying: "Venezuela should allow
Leopoldo Lopez,
a political prisoner, out of
prison immediately."
That same month, the U.S.
Treasury Department
designated Venezuelan Vice
President Tareck
El Aissami for sanctions on drug
trafficking
charges.
Secretary of State Rex Tillerson
today:
REX TILLERSON, U.S. Secretary of
State: We
are concerned that the
government of Maduro
is violating its own
Constitution and is not
allowing the opposition to have
their voices
heard.
MARGARET WARNER: Maduro has
blamed the U.S.
for trying to foment a coup.
NICOLAS MADURO, Venezuelan
President (through
translator): The time for combat
has arrived,
my fellow patriots.
The hour has arrived to decide
the future
and the destiny of our country.
MARGARET WARNER: Maduro came to
power four
years ago, upon the death of his
charismatic
predecessor, Hugo Chavez.
Maduro has struggled ever since.
Chavez himself survived a brief
coup in 2002,
and accused the United States of
trying to
subvert him.
Riding on high world oil prices,
Chavez had
created subsidies and price
controls, raising
living standards for the poor,
but no longer.
Again, Brian Ellsworth:
BRIAN ELLSWORTH: Once oil prices
collapsed
in 2014, the country basically
hadn't saved
money during the oil boom.
Private enterprise has a really
hard time
producing goods and services,
which means
we basically don't have them.
MARGARET WARNER: The Maduro
regime is also
under pressure from its Latin
American neighbors.
Eleven countries called this
week for a time
frame to hold elections.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm
Margaret Warner.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Next: Is the
scientific community
finding its political voice?
Science correspondent Miles
O'Brien looks
into what is behind street
protests here staged
by members of a profession not
generally known
for their activism.
It's part of our weekly Leading
Edge series.
WOMAN: Who is ready to stand up
for science?
(CHEERING AND APPLAUSE)
MILES O'BRIEN: They are
scientists, and on
this February Sunday in Boston,
they were
conducting an experiment they'd
just as soon
avoid.
Facing a White House that is
pushing across-the-board
steep cuts in federal science
funding, they
are taking to the streets.
Their hypothesis?
In order to keep their work
alive, they must
dive into the political fray.
GEOFFREY SUPRAN, Massachusetts
Institute of
Technology: Today, science
fights back.
(CHEERING AND APPLAUSE)
GEOFFREY SUPRAN: I think,
scientists, it's
not in our natural nature to
shout, to make
a loud noise, but, apparently,
we can do it
when come together.
MILES O'BRIEN: Geoffrey Supran
is a renewable
energy modeler at MIT.
He was there among a few hundred
protesters
in Copley Square, one of several
protests
staged by scientists since
Donald Trump became
president.
The administration has proposed
double-digit
cuts for the Environmental
Protection Agency
and the National Institutes of
Health, and
a 20 percent across-the-board
cut to research
on climate change.
GEOFFREY SUPRAN: As scientists,
it's actually
our responsibility, and as
citizens, to warn
the public when we see danger.
You know, if you see something,
say something.
And we feel the civic duty.
MILES O'BRIEN: The protesters
here hope this
rally is merely a prelude to
something much
bigger, a march en masse in
Washington and
hundreds of other cities all
over the world
on April 22.
Kishore Hari is one of the
organizers of the
Earth Day events.
KISHORE HARI, Protest Organizer:
Science has
been political since the time of
Galileo.
Nothing has changed between now
and then.
But it's important that we are
nonpartisan
because this is a march for
science, and that
unifies everyone around the
world.
MILES O'BRIEN: But the idea has
drawn controversy
from some scientists, who are
concerned march
organizers are also advocating a
host of other
liberal social causes.
The rally in Boston happened in
the midst
of the annual meeting of the
largest scientific
society in the world, the
American Association
for the Advancement of Science.
The organization is supporting
the political
mobilization of many of its
members.
Physicist and former Democratic
Congressman
Rush Holt is the CEO.
RUSH HOLT (D), Former U.S.
Congressman: This
would be -- it's purported to be
a demonstration
for science, the very idea of
science, the
essence of science.
Isn't that a wonderful idea?
NAOMI ORESKES, Harvard
University: This rally
isn't about promoting a
particular policy.
It's about promoting the idea
that the scientific
enterprise as a whole improves
our lives.
MILES O'BRIEN: Naomi Oreskes is
a scientist
and a professor of the history
of science
at Harvard University.
She has written extensively
about the role
of politics, special interests
and science.
For most of history, she says,
scientists
had to be politically and
publicly engaged
in order to fund their research.
But, in the U.S., that changed
after World
War II, when federal funding
started flowing
into laboratories.
NAOMI ORESKES: We lost the sense
of a kind
of civic obligation, or
reciprocal obligation,
that if we expect the taxpayer
to pay for
what we do, that we also should
-- that they
have an expectation that we
should be spending
time explaining it.
And I think that breakdown, that
reciprocal
communication breakdown, has had
real consequences
in our lifetimes.
MILES O'BRIEN: During that same
time, the
political pushback against
science grew, whether
the realm was evolution, acid
rain, the ozone
hole, or climate change.
NAOMI ORESKES: The scientific
community made
a mistake in not taking that
more seriously.
And so now we're in a situation
where it's
become a crisis.
And now the scientific
community, I think,
realizes that we have a very
serious problem
on our hands.
RUSH HOLT: Scientists, as a
rule, are not
comfortable being out there
politically, but
we should.
Putting science into politics
and into society
is something that they can do
and should do,
probably must do.
MILES O'BRIEN: Naomi Oreskes is
writing a
new book, science fiction that
imagines a
society that embraces climate
change science
and renewable energy.
Geoffrey Supran is helping her
with this.
After all, renewable energy is
what his research
is all about.
GEOFFREY SUPRAN: This is where
we make next-generation
LEDs and solar cells.
It's essentially a continuous
vacuum facility.
MILES O'BRIEN: Supran was here
in his lab
at MIT when President Obama
visited in 2009,
leaving his autograph on a
vacuum chamber
used to make better solar cells
and brighter
LEDs.
He was sitting in the same place
when it dawned
on him and his colleagues that
most of the
technology to tackle climate
change already
exists, but the political will
to do something
doesn't.
He says, for his generation of
scientists,
that is a call to action.
GEOFFREY SUPRAN: There's a
cultural shift
throughout that young people
are, I'm proud
to say, taking the lead, I
think.
And so we're really starting to
see the scientific
community adjusting to the
landscape and preparing
itself better to deal with the
political realities
of today.
And if they don't get it, let's
run for office
and vote them out.
(CHEERING AND APPLAUSE)
MILES O'BRIEN: Some scientists
are hoping
to do just that.
MAN: Shaughnessy, tell us a
little bit about
today.
WOMAN: Today, we had our first
candidate training
for scientists who are thinking
about running
for office.
MILES O'BRIEN: A science
advocacy group called
314 Action, which is encouraging
scientists
to run, says 3,000 have signed
up for its
candidate training program.
314 Action has some 101-level
political how-to
videos to help them take the
leap out of the
lab.
TRACY VAN HOUTEN, NASA Jet
Propulsion Laboratory:
Hi, Heather.
This is Tracy Van Houten, and
I'm the aerospace
engineer who is running for
Congress here
in this district.
MILES O'BRIEN: A handful have
thrown their
slide rules into the ring.
Tracy Van Houten is an engineer
at NASA's
Jet Propulsion Laboratory who
works on Mars
rovers.
TRACY VAN HOUTEN: I was in
Washington last
week, and then the president's
budget came
out, and I was there advocating
on behalf
of STEM education.
MILES O'BRIEN: She ran for in a
special election
for a vacated congressional seat
in Los Angeles.
TRACY VAN HOUTEN: If we really
care about
doing the big things in the
world, for me
at some point, it just didn't
feel big enough
anymore to focus on answering
mankind's questions
about the universe.
I needed to kind of return my
focus here on
Earth to help out in the
community here.
MILES O'BRIEN: Tracy Van Houten
didn't succeed
in her experiment.
She lost in the primary.
Despite her aspirations, she is
most at home
in a clean room.
The smoke-filled room is a new
frontier.
WOMAN: Science is not what?
AUDIENCE: Silence!
WOMAN: Thank you.
MILES O'BRIEN: Scientists may
find it hard
to make the transition, but many
of them believe
this is a phase change they are
compelled
to investigate.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm
Miles O'Brien
in Boston.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm
Miles O'Brien
in Boston.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Today is the 22nd
anniversary
of the Oklahoma City bombing;
168 people died
in that attack carried out by
Timothy McVeigh.
McVeigh sympathized with armed
right-wing
militia groups.
These groups are still active,
gaining members
online, and honing their combat
skills in
training camps.
The "NewsHour"'s P.J. Tobia went
inside one
of these camps to produce this
report.
P.J. TOBIA: This is the kill
house, part of
a training ground for a
right-wing militia
in the American South.
CHRIS "BLOOD AGENT" HILL,
Georgia Security
Force: It's for conducting
military operations
in urban terrain.
We want to practice and rehearse
moving out
to these structures, covering
each other,
taking cover and concealment
everywhere we
can find it.
P.J. TOBIA: These men and women
call themselves
the Georgia Security Force.
CHRIS "BLOOD AGENT" HILL: Our
common goal
is to provide for security for
ourselves,
our friends and our families,
and the other
people in our states, if and
when the need
should arise to do so.
P.J. TOBIA: Their leader, Chris
Hill, A.K.A.
Blood Agent, says the need could
arise at
any time.
CHRIS "BLOOD AGENT" HILL: I
think, what the
government gives, the government
can take
away.
If they're providing the
security for us,
they can take it away.
P.J. TOBIA: They're part of the
3 Percent
Militia, one of the nation's
largest armed
right-wing groups.
They believe only 3 percent of
colonial Americans
fought the Revolutionary War,
yet were able
to overthrow British rule.
Historians say the number of
male colonists
who fought in the conflict,
closer to 25 percent.
According to the Anti-Defamation
League, more
than 10,000 people identify as 3
Percenters.
They have a presence in nearly
every state.
Their ideology?
A mix of anti-government
conspiracy theories.
MAN: It could be our own
government overreaching.
If we end up with a tyrant in
office, no one
knows what could happen in 15
years, but at
least we're going to be
prepared.
P.J. TOBIA: 3 Percenters suspect
Islam and
foreigners.
Recent refugees represent both.
CHRIS "BLOOD AGENT" HILL: It's
an unarmed
invasion.
P.J. TOBIA: And some militia
have answered
with violence.
Recent, militia members have
allegedly participated
in high-profile felonies, from
plots to bomb
federal buildings, attacks on
immigrant communities
and murders.
J.J.
MACNAB, Author, "The
Seditionists": Yes, they
pose a big threat to public
safety.
P.J. TOBIA: J.J.
MacNab is an expert on these
groups.
She travels the country, leading
training
seminars for law enforcement on
militia and
other right-wing extremists.
She says the groups have
committed or planned
hundreds of violent attacks.
J.J.
MACNAB: They range from plots to
kill cops,
for example, blow up a police
headquarters.
There's a lot of resisting
arrest.
They don't believe that cops
have any authority
over them.
MAN: Two at a time, two at a
time.
P.J. TOBIA: There are more than
500 militia
groups in the U.S., more than
double the number
in 2008, according to the
Anti-Defamation
League.
Most of them are right-wing and
anti-government.
In addition to the 3 Percent
Militia, there's
the Oath Keepers, formed in
2009.
They're primarily current and
former law enforcement
and military personnel.
Oath Keepers showed up in
Ferguson, Missouri,
during the protests in the
summer of 2015.
They said they were there to
help keep the
peace and protect reporters
working for the
conspiracy-fueled Web site
Infowars.
Meanwhile, thousands have
flocked to older
groups like the Sovereign
Citizens Movement,
tax resisters who deny the
legitimacy of the
American government.
J.J.
MACNAB: There's a lot of
attempts to bomb,
a lot of attempts to build
bombs.
Some of them have dabbled in
biological weapons,
such as ricin.
P.J. TOBIA: The Georgia 3
Percenters say they
are strictly a defensive force.
In our time together, they
repeatedly renounced
violence and criminality.
Chris Hill says his group is
careful about
who they accept and train.
CHRIS "BLOOD AGENT" HILL: Well,
we go through
a vetting process.
Each member has to be
interviewed by a board
of no less than four to five
ranking members
from several different states.
We look for red flags.
If an individual seems radical
or they're
missing some screws, then we're
going to keep
that person to the side.
They're not going to be cleared
hot.
P.J. TOBIA: These men claim
their militia
gives them a sense of shared
identity.
DEVIN "BOOGEYMAN" BOWEN, Georgia
Security
Force: We have basically built
it as a family.
I don't have a lot of family, so
it's family
that I don't have, a lot of
like-minded people,
but yet we also stand for the
same cause.
CHRIS "BLOOD AGENT" HILL: I'm
seeing a conflict
in morals and values in the
country that make
me question, is this really
happening?
Crybabies are going to demand
transgender
bathrooms.
At the end of the day, your
rights end where
mine begin.
You know, don't push your belief
on me.
P.J. TOBIA: Especially if those
beliefs are
Islamic.
CHAD "KILL ZONE" LEGERE, Georgia
Security
Force: Any terrorist
organization cannot be
trusted.
And, unfortunately, a lot of
them, you know,
are stemming off from the Muslim
religion,
you know, from Islam.
P.J. TOBIA: In the last year,
the FBI has
disrupted major planned attacks
against Muslims
by men affiliated with militias.
The FBI is the lead agency in
these kinds
of investigations.
Militias have long been active
in the U.S.,
but they have been recently
energized by two
key events: last year's
occupation of an outside
wildlife refuge in Oregon by
anti-government
activist Ammon Bundy, and the
2014 standoff
in Nevada, where Bundy's father,
backed by
militiamen, squared off with
federal officials
over grazing rights on public
lands.
Chris Hill was one of those
militiamen at
Bundy ranch.
CHRIS "BLOOD AGENT" HILL: I was
pissed off.
I was angered seeing peaceful
people being
pushed around, and this
bureaucratic agency
is training their weapons down
on a family
because maybe they owe taxes
because the cows
eat corn.
P.J. TOBIA: For the Georgia 3
Percenters,
Donald Trump's election sends a
signal.
CHRIS "BLOOD AGENT" HILL: With a
Trump victory,
that gives me a little bit of
hope, where
I had none, that we can turn the
tide against
these communist, Marxist,
socialist ideas
of governing.
P.J. TOBIA: J.J.
MacNab says Trump's presidency
also changes
the target of militias' rage.
They can no longer focus on
President Obama
or candidate Clinton.
J.J.
MACNAB: I don't have a good
feeling about
where this is going.
What happens right now when
Trump paints targets
on people, when he paints
targets on the press?
He went off about a state
senator who did
something a sheriff didn't like
in Texas.
Well, let's take him down.
He says he's joking, but this
movement doesn't
have a sense of humor.
P.J. TOBIA: Despite the FBI's
recent arrests,
MacNab says federal law
enforcement isn't
doing enough.
J.J.
MACNAB: They have done almost
nothing to monitor
and counter this movement.
It started in 2009, right after
Obama took
office.
P.J. TOBIA: In that year, DHS
released a memo
to law enforcement, detailing
the threat posed
by right-wing extremists.
J.J.
MACNAB: But because it had a
line saying that
veterans returning home from war
were at risk
of being approached by this
movement, Homeland
Security disavowed it, and they
terminated
the division that tracked this
movement.
P.J. TOBIA: The man who led that
division
of DHS is Daryl Johnson.
DARYL JOHNSON, Former Department
of Homeland
Security Official: There was
basically a political
firestorm that erupted.
P.J. TOBIA: And you lost your
job.
DARYL JOHNSON: Pretty much.
P.J. TOBIA: Johnson says he was
forced to
resign and now runs a consulting
business
with government contracts.
What kind of capabilities for
monitoring these
groups does the DHS Have now?
DARYL JOHNSON: Yes, so, since I
left in 2010,
Homeland Security had one
analyst that was
looking at these problems, these
domestic
terrorist issues, and,
eventually, that lone,
single analyst left.
And so today they have no -- no
one looking
at this threat.
P.J. TOBIA: In response to
"NewsHour"'s questions
about militia groups, a
Department of Homeland
Security spokesperson said that,
since 2009,
they have improved their
analysis of domestic
terrorism and continue to work
with the FBI
to investigate these groups.
The spokesman denied that
Johnson was forced
out of the agency, adding that
Johnson's 2009
report was withdrawn because of
incomplete
sourcing and poor analytic
tradecraft.
But J.J.
MacNab says the lack of federal
law enforcement
attention has had deadly
consequences, like
when two Arkansas police
officers were gunned
down by tax-resisting Sovereign
Citizens in
2010.
J.J.
MACNAB: A police chief in West
Memphis, Arkansas,
had two of his officers killed
by a Sovereign
Citizen and two others shot.
He reads all the things that he
got from the
FBI, and while they had told him
in incredible
detail what the risks of
al-Qaida were, they
had never mentioned any
homegrown extremism
that wasn't Islamic.
P.J. TOBIA: Both Johnson and
MacNab say that
militia have successfully
recruited police
and active military personnel.
DARYL JOHNSON: We have a lot of
returning
veterans, military members who
have fought
in the wars in Afghanistan and
Iraq, and they
bring that mentality with them,
that training
that they had in the military,
that kind of
desensitized, dehumanized
Muslims in these
war zones and in these
conflicts.
And so, when they come home, a
lot of them
carry that sentiment with them,
and it reflects
itself in the modern-day militia
today.
J.J.
MACNAB: With law enforcement,
that's particularly
problematic, because if, for
example, an agency
wants to investigate someone
they suspect
of building a bomb, will one of
their members,
one of the police officers who
is part of
that group tip off the criminal?
There's a recent leak that came
out of an
FBI manual that talked about how
there were
white supremacists, for example,
in certain
police departments, but the FBI
couldn't tell
the police departments that it
was a problem,
because they were worried that
that would
tip off the white supremacists
they were investigating.
P.J. TOBIA: We asked to speak to
the FBI about
the monitoring of domestic
militias and militias
recruiting veterans.
The bureau declined, but a
spokesperson said,
"Our focus is not on membership
in particular
groups, but on criminal
activity."
The FBI added that they want to
protect the
rights of all Americans.
Members of the Georgia Security
Force claim
that they, too, are committed to
protecting
those rights by any means
necessary.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm P.J.
Tobia in
Monroe County, Georgia.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Finally, another
television
milestone.
FOX Television's animated comedy
series "The
Simpsons" turns 30 today and is
one of the
longest-running programs on
television history.
William Brangham tells that
story.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Thirty years
ago today,
viewers met what would become an
iconic American
family, the Simpsons.
On April 19, 1987, this
strange-talking, yellow-skinned
family of five made their TV
debut, appearing
initially on the sketch comedy
series "The
Tracey Ullman Show."
But, soon, 20th Century Fox spun
them off
into their own 30-minute
program.
More than 600 episodes, and 32
Emmy Awards
later, the Simpsons is now the
longest-running
scripted prime-time show in U.S.
history.
In its early years, "The
Simpsons" was criticized
by cultural conservatives, who
felt the show's
subversive streak set a bad
example for the
nation.
DAN CASTELLANETA, Actor: Just
remember to
have fun out there today.
And if you lose, I will kill
you.
(LAUGHTER)
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: The show even
earned a presidential
rebuke in 1992.
GEORGE H.W.
BUSH, Former President of the
United States:
To make American families a lot
more like
the Waltons and a lot less like
the Simpsons.
NANCY CARTWRIGHT, Actress: Hey,
we're just
like the Waltons.
We're praying for an end to the
depression
too.
ACTOR: Not now.
I'm on Twitter.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: But, in time,
the show's
wit and biting satire made it a
critical and
commercial success.
It's earned Fox billions of
dollars.
The 616th episode of "The
Simpsons" airs next
Sunday night, and, according to
its creators,
there are no plans for stopping
anytime soon.
From Springfield, I'm William
Brangham for
the "PBS NewsHour."
JUDY WOODRUFF: We certainly hope
not.
And that's the "NewsHour" for
tonight.
I'm Judy Woodruff.
Join us online and again right
here tomorrow
evening.
For all of us at the "PBS
NewsHour," thank
you, and we will see you soon.
For all of us at the "PBS
NewsHour," thank
you, and we will see you soon.